On a house near the Pitti Palace in Florence there is a plaque that
reads: “In this neighborhood between 1868 and 1869 F. M.
Dostoevsky completed his novel The Idiot.” It is strange to think of this
most Russian of writers working on this most Russian of novels while
living in the city of Dante. In fact the author’s absence from Russia
can be felt in the book, if we compare it with his preceding novel,
Crime and Punishment (1866), which is so saturated in place, in the
streets, buildings, squares, and bridges of Petersburg, that the city
becomes a living participant in events. Place has little importance in
The Idiot. Petersburg and the residential suburb of Pavlovsk, where
most of the action occurs, are barely described. There is little sense of
a surrounding world or a wider human community. Russia is present
in the novel not as a place but as a question — the essence of Russia,
the role of Russia and the “Russian Christ” in Europe and in the
world. It was precisely during the four years he spent abroad, from
1867 to 1871, that Dostoevsky brooded most intensely on the fate of
Russia, as the exiled Dante brooded on the fate of Florence.
But it would be a mistake to think that this lack of an objective
“world” makes The Idiot an abstract ideological treatise. On the
contrary, it is perhaps the most physical and even physiological of
Dostoevsky’s novels. Its events seem to take place internally, not in a
spiritual inwardness but within the body, within a body, rendered
more by sensation than by depiction. With Crime and Punishment, as
the philosopher Michel Eltchaninoff wrote recently,* Dostoevsky
buried the descriptive novel; in The Idiot he arrived at a new form,
expressive of “the inobjective body,” which overcomes the dualities of
interior and exterior, subjective and objective, physical and
psychological. It is given in certain modes of experience: sickness, for
instance, is as much subjective as objective; so is violence, and so is
life with others, the “invasive” presence of the other (hence the
privileged place Dostoevsky gives to doorways and thresholds, to

sudden entrances and unexpected meetings). And so, finally, are
words spoken and heard, written and read aloud. Dostoevsky
concentrates on these modes of experience in The Idiot to the
exclusion of almost all else. The novel, broadly speaking, is an
exploration of what it means to be flesh.
The idea of the “Russian Christ” is important in The Idiot (and was
certainly important to his creator, who repeated Myshkin’s words on
the subject almost verbatim nine years later in his Diary of a Writer),
but a much stronger presence in the novel is the painting that
Dostoevsky significantly calls “The Dead Christ” (the actual title is
Christ’s Body in the Tomb), a work by Hans Holbein the Younger that
hangs in the museum of Basel. Dostoevsky places a copy of the
painting in the house of the young merchant millionaire Rogozhin. It
is discussed twice in the novel, the second time at length and in a key
passage. The shape of the painting is unusual: the narrator describes it
as being “around six feet wide and no more than ten inches high.” It
is, in other words, totally lacking in vertical dimension.
Dostoevsky first read about Holbein’s painting in Nikolai Karamzin’s
Letters of a Russian Traveler (1801), an account of the young author’s
travels in Europe, modeled on Laurence Sterne’s Sentimental Journey.
In a letter written from Basel, Karamzin mentions that he has been to
the picture gallery there and “looked with great attention and
pleasure at the paintings of the illustrious Holbein, a native of Basel
and friend of Erasmus.” Of this painting in particular (giving it yet
another title) he observes: “In ‘Christ Taken Down from the Cross’ one
doesn’t see anything of God. As a dead man he is portrayed quite
naturally. According to legend, Holbein painted it from a drowned
Jew.” That is all. But these few words must have made a strong

impression on Dostoevsky. In August 1867, on their way from Baden-
Baden to Geneva, he and his young wife made a special stop in Basel

to see the painting.
Dostoevsky’s wife, Anna Grigorievna, wrote an account of their visit
to the museum in her memoirs, published forty years later:
On the way to Geneva we stopped for a day in Basel, with the purpose of seeing a painting
in the museum there that my husband had heard about from someone.
This painting, from the brush of Hans Holbein, portrays Jesus Christ, who has suffered
inhuman torture, has been taken down from the cross and given over to corruption. His
swollen face is covered with bloody wounds, and he looks terrible. The painting made an
overwhelming impression on my husband, and he stood before it as if dumbstruck ...

When I returned some fifteen or twenty minutes later, I found my husband still standing in
front of the painting as if riveted to it. There was in his agitated face that expression as of
fright which I had seen more than once in the first moments of an epileptic fit. I quietly took
him under the arm, brought him to another room, and sat him down on a bench, expecting a
fit to come at any moment. Fortunately that did not happen.

In a stenographic diary kept at the time of the visit itself, she noted:
“generally, it looked so much like an actual dead man that I really
think I wouldn’t dare stay in the same room with it. But F. admired
this painting. Wishing to have a closer look at it, he stood on a chair,
and I was very afraid he’d be asked to pay a fine, because here one
gets fined for everything.”
Each of the three main male characters of the novel — the saintly
“idiot” Myshkin, the passionate, earthbound Rogozhin, and the
consumptive nihilist Ippolit — defines himself in relation to this
painting. The question it poses hangs over the whole novel: what if
Christ was only a man? What if he suffered, died, and was left a
bruised, lifeless corpse, as Holbein shows him? It is, in other words,
the question of the Resurrection. Dostoevsky, who was very careful
about the names he gave his characters, calls the heroine of The Idiot
Nastasya, a shortened form of Anastasia: anastasis is “resurrection” in
Greek. Her last name, Barashkov, comes from the Russian word for
“lamb.”
The name of the novel’s hero, Prince Lev Nikolaevich Myshkin, is
also worth considering. It draws a pointed and oddly insistent
comment from the clerk Lebedev on its first mention at the start of the
novel: “the name’s historical, it can and should be found in
Karamzin’s History.” Karamzin’s History of the Russian State was one of
the most popular books of nineteenth-century Russia. In his Diary of a
Writer (1873), Dostoevsky recalls: “I was only ten when I already
knew virtually all the principal episodes of Russian history — from
Karamzin whom, in the evenings, father used to read aloud to us.” He
could assume a similar knowledge among his contemporaries. But, as
the literary scholar Tatiana Kasatkina pointed out in a recent lecture,†
later commentators on The Idiot have generally failed to follow
Lebedev’s suggestion. Looking in Karamzin’s History, we do indeed
find the name Myshkin; it belonged not to a prince but to an architect.
In 1471 Metropolitan Filipp of Moscow decided to build a new stone
Cathedral of the Dormition of the Mother of God, and Myshkin was
one of the two architects called in to build it. It was to be modeled on

the Cathedral of the Dormition in Vladimir, the biggest in Russia. The
architects went to Vladimir, took measurements, and promised to
build an even bigger cathedral in Moscow. By 1474 the walls had
reached vault level when the addition of a monumental stairway
caused the entire structure to collapse. Dostoevsky twice wrote the
words “Prince-Christ” in his notebooks for The Idiot. Readers have
taken this to be an equation and, like Romano Guardini in Der Mensch
und der Glaube (Man and Faith, subtitled “a study of religious existence
in Dostoevsky’s major novels”), have seen Prince Myshkin as a
“symbol of Christ” or, in Tatiana Kasatkina’s words, as a man upon
whom “the radiance of Christ somehow rests,” one who is “meant to
stand for, or in some way even replace, the person of Christ for us.”
Karamzin’s account of the architect Myshkin suggests a more
ambiguous reading — as indeed does the prince’s name itself, which is
compounded of “lion” (lev) and “mouse” (mysh).