THE FIRST NIGHT
It was a wonderful night, the kind of night, dear reader, which is only
possible when we are young. The sky was so starry, it was such a bright sky
that looking at it you could not help but ask yourself: is it really possible for
bad-tempered and capricious people to live under such a sky? That is also a
young person’s question, dear reader, a very young person’s question, but
may the Lord ask it of your heart more often! … Speaking of capricious and
sundry bad-tempered gentlemen, I could not help but recall my own
commendable conduct throughout the whole day. From early morning an
astonishing melancholy had started to torment me. It suddenly seemed that
I, so alone, was being abandoned by everyone – that everyone was
deserting me. Well, of course, anyone is entitled to ask: who is ‘everyone’?
Because I’ve been living in Petersburg eight years now and I’ve hardly been
able to make a single acquaintance. But what do I need acquaintances for?
I’m acquainted with all of Petersburg as it is; that’s why it seemed to me
that everyone was abandoning me when all of Petersburg suddenly up and
left for their dachas. I was terrified of being left alone, and for three whole
days I wandered about the city in a state of deep melancholy, not
understanding in the least what was happening to me. No matter whether I
went to Nevsky Prospekt, or the park, or wandered along the embankment –
there wasn’t a single person of those whom I have been accustomed to meet
for a year now in the same place, at a certain time. Of course, they don’t
know me, but I know them. I know them intimately; I have practically
learned their faces by heart – and I admire them when they are cheerful, and
I’m crestfallen when they grow sad. I almost struck up a friendship with a
certain little old man, whom I meet every blessed day, at a certain hour on
the Fontanka. His face is so dignified and thoughtful; he’s always
whispering under his breath and gesticulating with his left hand, while in
his right hand he holds a long gnarled walking-stick with a golden knob.
He’s even noticed me and shows a cordial concern for me. Should it happen
that I’m not at the same place on the Fontanka at a certain hour, I’m
positive that he would be crestfallen. That’s why we sometimes almost greet
each other, particularly when we’re both in a good mood. The other day,
when we had not seen each other for two whole days and met on the third
day, we almost reached for our hats, but, thank goodness, we came to our
senses in time, lowered our hands and passed each other by in sympathy. I
also have houses that are my acquaintances. As I walk, it’s as if each one I
come to runs out into the street in front of me, looks out at me with its
windows wide open and almost says: ‘Hello, how do you do? And I, thank
God, am well, but in May they’re going to add a floor to me.’ Or: ‘How do
you do? And I’m having some repairs done tomorrow.’ Or: ‘I almost burned
down and I was so scared’, and so forth. I have favourites among them,
some are intimate friends; one of them intends to be treated by an architect
this summer. I’ll make it a point to drop by every day so that, God forbid,
they don’t kill it in the process! … But I will never forget what happened to
a certain very pretty, light-pink little house. It was such a sweet little stone
house; it looked at me so cordially, and so haughtily at its ungainly
neighbours, that my heart would rejoice when I chanced to walk past.